# did:self method specification
## Author
* Nikos Fotiou, [Mobile Multimedia Laboratory, AUEB](https://mm.aueb.gr)

## About
did:self is a DID method that enables DID document management without registries. 
A did:self identifier is an Ed25519 public key.
The corresponding 
DID document is protected by a "proof", which is a JSON Web Signature generated
by the private key that corresponds to the did:self identifier.

A Python3 [implementation](https://github.com/mmlab-aueb/did-self-py)

### Research
* Our [SCN4ND](https://mm.aueb.gr/scn4ndn/) project that uses did:self.
* Application of did:self in IPFS [N. Fotiou, V.A. Siris, G.C. Polyzos,
"Enabling self-verifiable mutable content items in IPFS using Decentralized 
Identifiers", in DI2F: Decentralising the Internet with IPFS and Filecoin, IFIP Networking 2021 workshop](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08395)
* Application of did:self in securing routing in Named Data Networking
[N.Fotiou, Y. Thomas, V.A. Siris, G. Xylomenos and G.C. Polyzos, "Securing Named Data Networking routing using Decentralized Identifiers," in Proc. SARNET-21 workshop, IEEE International Conference on High Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR), Paris, France, June 2021](https://mm.aueb.gr/publications/12279f1a-8166-4560-aead-56dfe90df93f.pdf)

## The did:self method 
The name of this DID method is: `self`

The method specific identifier is represented as the base64url value
of an Ed25519 public key. e.g.,

```
did:self:6varD0RjXZfW58v4DGtd7kltX6Kzn9fghX94LvrMDxo
```

The DID document is a JSON-encoded file that must include at least
the `id` property.  

The integrity of a DID document is verified using a 
`document proof`. A `document proof` is a compact encoded 
[JSON Web Signature (JWS)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7515).
The payload of the proof is a JSON string that includes at least the following 
fields: 

* `id` The DID.
* `created` The string value of an ISO8601 combined date and time string
* `sha-256` The base64url encoded hash of the DID document, calculated using SHA-256.

The signature of the proof is an EdDSA signature which is generated 
by the did:self DID `controller`. If the `controller` is also the did:self 
DID `owner`, the signature is generated using the private key that corresponds 
to the did:self DID. Otherwise, the signature is generated using a private key
owned by the `controller`. In the latter case an additional
`authorization` proof is required to prove that the controller key is
authorized by the DID owner to sign a DID document proof. An authorization proof 
is also a JWS, which is signed by the did:self DID owner, and its payload is 
a JSON string that includes the following fields:

* `id` The DID.
* `created` The string value of an ISO8601 combined date and time string
* `sha-256` The base64url encoded hash of the DID document, calculated using SHA-256.
* `controller` The public key of the controller encoded as a JSON Web Key. 


## CRUD Operation Definitions
CRUD operations are implemented by the users. 

### Create
The Create operation initializes a did:self DID and creates an initial DID document. 
The proof of the initial DID document is signed using the DID
and it is the fist element of the proof chain. The following is a valid DID document

```JSON
{
  "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU",
  "controller": "did:key:z6MKGRqQ8Pb5ZKzUpXotN1NipJYQx2edHFR6aV2tREgJJMhL",
  "authentication": [
    {
      "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU#key1",
      "type": "JsonWebKey2020",
      "publicKeyJwk": {
        "kty": "OKP",
        "crv": "Ed25519",
        "x": "nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The following is the corresponding proof payload

```JSON
{
  "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU",
  "controller": "did:key:z6MKGRqQ8Pb5ZKzUpXotN1NipJYQx2edHFR6aV2tREgJJMhL",
  "created": "2021-03-10T22:59:54Z",
  "sha-256": "2L5DctVFPBp_po3caEvwUmg1w5-NvTskH485fV8gwek"
}
```

The following is the proof chain after the invocation of the `Create` method. The signature
of the proof can be verified using `nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU`, i.e., the key
that corresponds to the DID.

```
[
  "eyJhbGciOiAiRWREU0EifQ.eyJpZCI6ICJkaWQ6c2VsZjpuTHlNdV8zUjdJS25Ial9MamxMcGhaMVFXTXA0VTdWbGRjMHlhRkk3ZURVIiwgImNvbnRyb2xsZXIiOiAiZGlkOmtleTp6Nk1LR1JxUThQYjVaS3pVcFhvdE4xTmlwSllReDJlZEhGUjZhVjJ0UkVnSkpNaEwiLCAiY3JlYXRlZCI6ICIyMDIxLTAzLTEwVDIyOjU5OjU0WiIsICJzaGEtMjU2IjogIjJMNURjdFZGUEJwX3BvM2NhRXZ3VW1nMXc1LU52VHNrSDQ4NWZWOGd3ZWsifQ.epEVNpCsb4wP7R1xakBpkA_nMWJmC9JtPXyK4sAf5ub2ju-W-j86h3H1ISTPWJ-6zm5Ygf-yJ933hjQ_ajRsAQ"
]
```

### Update
With the Update operation an existing DID document is replaced with a new one. 
Since only controllers can update a DID document, 
the proof of the new DID document must be generated 
by the controller of the **DID document being replaced**.
If the new proof and the last element of the proof chain are generated by the same controller, 
then the last element of the chain is replaced with the new proof, otherwise the new proof 
is appended to the proof chain.

The following is an update to the previous DID document, which modifies the controller.

```JSON
{
  "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU",
  "controller": "did:key:z6MKJ8owm1HAzMRUJAUNtuBcyhkMPRaCwa7XWTi86TvShf2w",
  "authentication": [
    {
      "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU#key1",
      "type": "JsonWebKey2020",
      "publicKeyJwk": {
        "kty": "OKP",
        "crv": "Ed25519",
        "x": "nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The following is the corresponding proof payload

```JSON
Proof payload:
{
  "id": "did:self:nLyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU",
  "controller": "did:key:z6MKJ8owm1HAzMRUJAUNtuBcyhkMPRaCwa7XWTi86TvShf2w",
  "created": "2021-03-10T22:59:54Z",
  "sha-256": "CjzuQPolyxr4zsZTyuP1HXVMHzVSypmBwqFzsWy1iu4"
}
```
The proof is signed with the private key that corresponds to `did:key:z6MKGRqQ8Pb5ZKzUpXotN1NipJYQx2edHFR6aV2tREgJJMhL`,
the key of the controller of
DID document that was replaced

The following is the proof chain after the invocation of the `Update` method. The signature
of the first proof can be verified using `LyMu_3R7IKnHj_LjlLphZ1QWMp4U7Vldc0yaFI7eDU`, i.e., the key
that corresponds to the DID. The signature of the second proof can be verified using the key that corresponds to
`did:key:z6MKGRqQ8Pb5ZKzUpXotN1NipJYQx2edHFR6aV2tREgJJMhL`, i.e., the key of the controller of
DID document that was replaced: this key can be found in the payload of the first 
signature.

```
[
  "eyJhbGciOiAiRWREU0EifQ.eyJpZCI6ICJkaWQ6c2VsZjpuTHlNdV8zUjdJS25Ial9MamxMcGhaMVFXTXA0VTdWbGRjMHlhRkk3ZURVIiwgImNvbnRyb2xsZXIiOiAiZGlkOmtleTp6Nk1LR1JxUThQYjVaS3pVcFhvdE4xTmlwSllReDJlZEhGUjZhVjJ0UkVnSkpNaEwiLCAiY3JlYXRlZCI6ICIyMDIxLTAzLTEwVDIyOjU5OjU0WiIsICJzaGEtMjU2IjogIjJMNURjdFZGUEJwX3BvM2NhRXZ3VW1nMXc1LU52VHNrSDQ4NWZWOGd3ZWsifQ.epEVNpCsb4wP7R1xakBpkA_nMWJmC9JtPXyK4sAf5ub2ju-W-j86h3H1ISTPWJ-6zm5Ygf-yJ933hjQ_ajRsAQ",
  "eyJhbGciOiAiRWREU0EifQ.eyJpZCI6ICJkaWQ6c2VsZjpuTHlNdV8zUjdJS25Ial9MamxMcGhaMVFXTXA0VTdWbGRjMHlhRkk3ZURVIiwgImNvbnRyb2xsZXIiOiAiZGlkOmtleTp6Nk1LSjhvd20xSEF6TVJVSkFVTnR1QmN5aGtNUFJhQ3dhN1hXVGk4NlR2U2hmMnciLCAiY3JlYXRlZCI6ICIyMDIxLTAzLTEwVDIyOjU5OjU0WiIsICJzaGEtMjU2IjogIkNqenVRUG9seXhyNHpzWlR5dVAxSFhWTUh6VlN5cG1Cd3FGenNXeTFpdTQifQ.YJG_EmOsVBWo1yp19MTYqN2tITkXjoibNFQyYghazGbDWS1Rcr1wryrSO36jmoSST6MVdf5KRaImuCNkwHt9DQ"
]
```

### Read
The Read operation simply outputs the DID document and 
the corresponding proof chain.

## DID document validation
Given a DID, a DID document, and a proof chain, any entity can attest
whether or not the DID document is a valid document for the given DID 
using the following protocol.

1. First, verify that the `sha-256` field of the payload of the last proof of the chain contains the hash of the DID document.
1. As a next step, verify that the `id` field of the payload of all proofs of the chain is equal to the DID.
1. Then, verify the first proof of the chain using the DID
1. Finally, starting from the second proof of the chain, verify all proofs using the `controller` field of the payload of their previous proof.





